Home
Part of the Aerospace Engineering Department at IIT Madras, RAFT, focuses on research pertaining to rotary-wing aircraft and other innovative flight technologies.  We explore multiple avenues of aeromechanics which include experimental studies on rotor-based aircraft, numerical modeling of the aerodynamic environment around a rotor to predict rotor performance, studies on dynamic stall, and flapping wing flight to name a few. Flight dynamics is also pursued, involving investigations on ground and air resonance phenomena and their predictive methods, effects of dynamic stall on stability of helicopters, and trajectory tracking and optimisation. This challenging interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary aspect of rotorcraft research gathers together students and researchers here, all attempting to unravel the mysteries of flight, one tangle at a time. Ceaselessly persistent, never yielding.

Research Highlights
Aeromechanics and Performance

    Unlike the gracefully gliding, simple and elegant machines of flight that airplanes are, helicopters are beasts that beat the air into submission to achieve flight! A colossal amount of research and labor goes into making these mechanised hummingbirds 'float like a butterfly and sting like a bee'. 

    Aeromechanics comprise one of the fields that help these machines conquer the air. Although over the years, rotorcraft have undeniably become safer and many complex phenomena have been resolved, there still exist a few like dynamic stall in three-dimensions, rotor-wake interactions with external bodies in motion, vortex-blade and vortex-vortex interactions that still remain hazy. To resolve the questions that plague these phenomena and to ensure predictability, experiments and computational investigations are performed using CFD or reduced order mathematical models. In many cases, the underlying 'simple' physics might be made complex and indeterminable due to additional constraints or design elements. Co-axial and compound helicopters are a prime example of this, where an extra rotor brings about considerable variations in how the entire system behaves. In such cases, existing models require modification or new models proposed. An active area of research on that note is finite state dynamic inflow modeling. Dynamic inflow models provide information on the inflow across rotor disks and how they change over time. Presence of external obstacles also influence such models and require extensive validation and testing like which is performed at RAFT. Vortex based smulation methods are also actively explored since they offer many of the advantages of CFD minus the computational costs. These help in understanding how the rotor wake interacts with external obstacles or other rotors and in turn affect rotor performance.

Dynamics and Control

    Outwardly simple, the helicopter appears to the untrained eye to be a rotating rotor connected to a non rotating fuselage with mechanical linkages. Strip it down, and you’ll find that, that’s a deceiving piece of engineering marvel. It would seem a surprise that this muddle of machinery can fly, let alone be controlled! This has been made possible by in depth analysis of the dynamics and design of control mechanisms that have evolved over the years to state-of-the-art, fully autonomous and Fly by Wire controls of today. However as the sphere of application increases, the requirement to make the system more stable and robust also increases. Though simpler and more elegant in appearance, the case is no different for other multirotor vehicles. At RAFT, we aim to understand the dynamics, analyse the stability and develop robust control systems so as to enable rotorcraft to soar higher and cruise faster.


Analysis and control of aeromechanical instabilities in helicopters

    Helicopters, like any other dynamic system are prone to instabilities and research over the years have focused on understanding them, reasoning them out and developing preventive mechanisms. The focus of our research in flight dynamics has been on certain phenomena called ground resonance and air resonance. Although we’ve come a long way since the Tacoma bridge incident that’s popularly cited in reference to resonance and resonance-induced instabilities, the mechanism behind ground and air resonance in helicopters is slightly different from the bridge resonance accident. Ground resonance, has proven to be a pilot’s nightmare on many an occasion destroying the helicopter in a matter of seconds. The seemingly robust mechanical system, rigid enough to carry people and payload for years, breaks apart due to mere vibrations in the blink of an eye. Studies on ground and air resonance gained interest, particularly when many ambitious plans for advanced helicopters had to be dropped owing to this dangerous issue. Over the years, the frequency of incidents have reduced, thanks to helicopters designed with efficient lead lag dampers and operating rpms chosen after extensive testing. However, a large number of  pilots report incidents involving ground resonance during ship deck landings and how training and quick thinking were the only reasons that prevented the aircraft from complete destruction, further establishing the need for deeper investigation of this phenomenon. Work at RAFT is focused on analytical and experimental investigation of ground resonance, understanding the influence of various mechanical and aerodynamic parameters and development of stability augmentation systems. In addition, simulations of helicopters landing on ship decks are performed to understand how ground proximity and wake dynamics affect stability and handling qualities.


Robust controllers for MAVs

    RC helicopter enthusiasts will be aware of the interesting (and intriguing) fact that it requires added effort from the part of the human controller to maneuverer the heli when flying close to structures like walls, ceiling etc. The scenario is similar when MAVs (UAVs) of single or multirotor configurations have to cruise through a constrained environment. Additional disturbances come into play and it’s important to account for these while designing the controller. At RAFT, we attempt to quantify these forces, theoretically, computationally and experimentally and design controllers that are robust and cognitive, enabling the UAV to successfully adapt to any adverse environment. The ultimate aim is to extend this to efficient controllers for UAVs that would enable us perform tasks like painting a large wall autonomously, or drilling a hole somewhere really high up, in inspections or work on tall towers where winds are dangerously high and so on; the applications are truly endless!


